Add InlineArrayType to support literals conversion to statically and dynamically allocated arrays. (#12883)
ethereum/solidity: docs/types/reference-types.rst

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An array literal is a comma-separated list of one or more expressions, enclosed
in square brackets (``[...]``). For example ``[1, a, f(3)]``. It can be converted to

> statically and dynamically-sized array if all it's expressions can be implicitly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statically and dynamically-sized array if all its expressions can be implicitly
```

Author: fixed

converted to the base type of the array. In example below, the conversion is impossible
because ``-1`` cannot be implicitly converted to ``uint8``.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.8.15 <0.9.0;

    // This will not compile
    contract C {
        function f() public pure {
            // The next line creates a type error because int_const -1
            // cannot be converted to uint8 memory.
            g([1, -1]);
        }
        function g(uint8[] memory) public pure {
            // ...
        }
    }

> For statically-sized arrays, conversion can be performed only if length of the array match
> the number of the expressions in the array literal. Therefore following is impossible:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A conversion into a statically-sized array can only be performed only if the length of the array matches
the number of the expressions in the array literal. Therefore following is impossible:
```

Author: updated

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.8.15 <0.9.0;

    // This will not compile
    contract C {
        function f() public pure {
            // The next line creates a type error because inline_array(int_const 1, int_const 1)
            // cannot be converted to uint[3] memory.
            g([1, 2]);
        }
        function g(uint[3] memory) public pure {
            // ...
        }
    }

> Array literals can be used also to initialize multi-dimesional arrays:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Array literals can also be used to initialize multi-dimensional arrays:
```

Author: fixed

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An array literal is a comma-separated list of one or more expressions, enclosed

> in square brackets (``[...]``). For example ``[1, a, f(3)]``. It can be converted to

Reviewer: This explains the type it can be converted to, but does it have its own type? Is `[1,2].length` valid? What is the type of `[1,2][0]`?

(It is fine to say that these are all not valid, but we should mention it)

Author: Documentation updated. Hope it is better now.

statically and dynamically-sized array if all its expressions can be implicitly

> converted to the base type of the array. In example below, the conversion is impossible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
converted to the base type of the array. In the example below, the conversion is impossible
```

Author: done

Author: Yes, copying works with a way more than 16 elements. An interesting thing is the compiler seems to work way much faster and seamlessly without IR. Below you can find the results of tests. As a baseline I did tests for the solc 8.14. Optimization was enabled for all the tests.

The `Point` structure used in tests:
`struct Point {
        uint256 x;
        uint256 y;
    }`

via-IR:
| scenario | solc 8.14 | solc with changes |
|---|---|---|
|uint256[1000] memory a = [...];| 7m32s| 5m27s|
|Point[1000] memory a = [...];| 1m6s | exception |
|Point[240] memory a = [...];| NA | 1m38s|

no-IR:
| scenario | solc 8.14 | solc with changes |
|---|---|---|
|uint256[1000] memory a = [...];|4s| 2s|
|Point[1000] memory a = [...];| 1m6s | 2s |

The excpetion I get in one out of tests:
`...
Dynamic exception type: boost::wrapexcept<solidity::yul::YulAssertion>
std::exception::what: Could not create stack layout after 1000 iterations.
[solidity::util::tag_comment*] = Could not create stack layout after 1000 iterations.
`
@ekpyron I guess it requires attention. Do you think it should be done before we deliver this PR?

Reviewer 2: Haha, interesting :-)! Let me have a look - it may just be a matter of increasing the limit there.

This hints at a disadvantage of keeping things on stack, though: the EVM stack is only 1024 slots large in total... usually that's of little concern, but for such very large inline arrays, we may actually hit this limit, whereas we wouldn't have, if we kept constructing the array in memory right away... but maybe that's a reasonable limitation :-) - but something to think about, since the real-world array in ``MediumVerifier`` with 806 slots is not that far off that limit...

Reviewer 2: Although, the Yul optimizer may actually transform the code into something that actually doesn't need a large number of stack slots, even if we first generate code like that...
In any case, it's generally a bit unfortunate that via-IR is extremely slow for these cases...

            // Dynamic memory arrays are created using `new`:
            uint[2][] memory arrayOfPairs = new uint[2][](size);

>             // Static memory arrays can be set with inline array

Reviewer: Should be "statically-sized" and "assigned" instead of "set"

Reviewer: Also please check if this example is actually still useful or not.

Author: I will remove it since it does not benefit that much, especially in this section.

            arrayOfPairs[0] = [1, 2];

> 

Reviewer: Can you add a note to the end of the chapter that shortly explains how array literals worked before?

Also can you please check the following:
For storage, I think there are fewer restrictions with regards to the length of the array. I think you can assign a statically-sized array to a dynamically-sized array. Can you check that we did not break anything in that area?

Author: Note added.

I think the  scenario you described is covered by [array_copy_storage_storage_static_dynamic.sol](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/array_literals_for_dynamic_arrays/test/libsolidity/semanticTests/array/copying/array_copy_storage_storage_static_dynamic.sol), isn't it? There is also a scenario that checks a storage assignment between dynamically-sized arrays: [array_copy_storage_storage_dynamic_dynamic.sol](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/array_literals_for_dynamic_arrays/test/libsolidity/semanticTests/array/copying/array_copy_storage_storage_dynamic_dynamic.sol). Last combination would be to assign dynamically-sized array to statically-sized, but this is forbiddent, right?
